Integrating remote_process with PEcAn (#2672)
PecanProject/pecan: book_source/03_topical_pages/09_standalone_tools.Rmd

2. **Sign up for NASA Earthdata**. Using AppEEARS requires an Earthdata account visit this [page](https://urs.earthdata.nasa.gov/users/new) to create your own account.

3. **Install the RpTools package**. Python codes required by this module are stored in a Python package named "RpTools" using this requires Python3 and the package manager pip to be installed in your system. 
   To install the package,
a. Navigate to `pecan/modules/data.remote/inst/RpTools` If you are inside the pecan directory, this can be done by,
```bash
cd modules/data.remote/inst/RpTools
```
b. Use pip to install the package. "-e" flag is used to install the package in an editable or develop mode, so that changes made to the code get updated in the package without reinstalling.
```bash

> pip install -e .

Reviewer: I'm not able to install this

```
$ pip install -e .
Obtaining file:///home/istfer/pecan/modules/data.remote/inst/RpTools
Collecting attrs>=19.3.0 (from RpTools==0.1)
  Using cached https://files.pythonhosted.org/packages/a2/db/4313ab3be961f7a763066401fb77f7748373b6094076ae2bda2806988af6/attrs-19.3.0-py2.py3-none-any.whl
Collecting cachetools>=4.1.1 (from RpTools==0.1)
  Could not find a version that satisfies the requirement cachetools>=4.1.1 (from RpTools==0.1) (from versions: 0.0.0, 0.1.0, 0.2.0, 0.3.0, 0.3.1, 0.4.0, 0.5.0, 0.5.1, 0.6.0, 0.7.0, 0.7.1, 0.8.0, 0.8.1, 0.8.2, 1.0.0, 1.0.1, 1.0.2, 1.0.3, 1.1.0, 1.1.1, 1.1.2, 1.1.3, 1.1.4, 1.1.5, 1.1.6, 2.0.0, 2.0.1, 2.1.0, 3.0.0, 3.1.0, 3.1.1)
No matching distribution found for cachetools>=4.1.1 (from RpTools==0.1)
You are using pip version 9.0.1, however version 20.2.2 is available.
You should consider upgrading via the 'pip install --upgrade pip' command.

```
Looks like our python versions are out of date? When I try `pip install --upgrade pip` I get

```
Collecting pip
  Using cached https://files.pythonhosted.org/packages/5a/4a/39400ff9b36e719bdf8f31c99fe1fa7842a42fa77432e584f707a5080063/pip-20.2.2-py2.py3-none-any.whl
Installing collected packages: pip
  Found existing installation: pip 9.0.1
    Uninstalling pip-9.0.1:
Exception:
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/usr/local/lib/python2.7/dist-packages/pip-9.0.1-py2.7.egg/pip/basecommand.py", line 215, in main
    status = self.run(options, args)
  File "/usr/local/lib/python2.7/dist-packages/pip-9.0.1-py2.7.egg/pip/commands/install.py", line 342, in run
    prefix=options.prefix_path,
  File "/usr/local/lib/python2.7/dist-packages/pip-9.0.1-py2.7.egg/pip/req/req_set.py", line 778, in install
    requirement.uninstall(auto_confirm=True)
  File "/usr/local/lib/python2.7/dist-packages/pip-9.0.1-py2.7.egg/pip/req/req_install.py", line 754, in uninstall
    paths_to_remove.remove(auto_confirm)
  File "/usr/local/lib/python2.7/dist-packages/pip-9.0.1-py2.7.egg/pip/req/req_uninstall.py", line 115, in remove
    renames(path, new_path)
  File "/usr/local/lib/python2.7/dist-packages/pip-9.0.1-py2.7.egg/pip/utils/__init__.py", line 267, in renames
    shutil.move(old, new)
  File "/usr/lib/python2.7/shutil.py", line 300, in move
    rmtree(src)
  File "/usr/lib/python2.7/shutil.py", line 247, in rmtree
    rmtree(fullname, ignore_errors, onerror)
  File "/usr/lib/python2.7/shutil.py", line 252, in rmtree
    onerror(os.remove, fullname, sys.exc_info())
  File "/usr/lib/python2.7/shutil.py", line 250, in rmtree
    os.remove(fullname)
OSError: [Errno 13] Permission denied: '/usr/local/lib/python2.7/dist-packages/pip-9.0.1-py2.7.egg/pip/wheel.pyc'
```

@mdietze is it possible to upgrade pecan2?

Author: Could you try doing `pip3 install -e .`

Reviewer: ```
pip3 install -e .
The program 'pip3' is currently not installed. To run 'pip3' please ask your administrator to install the package 'python3-pip'
```

Author: Oh ok I think you also have Python 2 installed.  You will need pip3 here.

Reviewer: Yeah that's why I need @mdietze's help, I happen to set up your branch on a machine where I don't have sudo privileges, even then I would be hesitant to do a system-wide installation

```bash
pip3 install -e .
```
4. **Authenticate GEE**. The GEE API needs to be authenticated using your credentials. The credentials will be stored locally on your system. This can be done by,
```bash
#this will open a browser and ask you to sign in with the Google account registered for GEE
earthengine authenticate
```
5. **Save the Earthdata credentials**. If you wish to use AppEEARS you will have to store your username and password inside a JSON file and then pass its file path as an argument in `remote_process` 

#### Usage guide:
This module contains GEE and other processing functions which retrieve data from a specific dataset and source. For example, `gee2pecan_s2()` downloads bands from Sentinel 2 using GEE and `bands2lai_snap()` uses the downloaded bands to compute LAI using the SNAP algorithm. These functions can be used independently but the recommended way is to use `remote_process`which is the main function that controls all the individual functions to create an organized way of downloading and storing remote sensing data in PEcAn. 

> 

Reviewer: if you have time, it would be great if you could include a workflow scheme around here that explains the high-level functionality, which function calls what, which decisions are made...

### Configuring `remote_process`

`remote_process` is configured using remote data tags in the `pecan.xml`. The required tags are described below,

```xml
  <remotedata>

>   <raw_mimetype>...</raw_mimetype>

Author: :eyes:

* `collection`: (required) dataset or product name as it is provided on the source, e.g. "COPERNICUS/S2_SR" for gee or "SPL3SMP_E.003" for appeears
* `scale`: (optional) pixel resolution required for some gee collections, recommended to use 10 for Sentinel 2 **scale** Information about how GEE handles scale can be found out [here](https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/scale)
* `projection`: (optional) type of projection. Only required for appeears polygon AOI type
* `qc`: (optional) quality control parameter, required for some gee collections
* `overwrite`: (optional) if TRUE database checks will be skipped and existing data of same type will be replaced entirely. When processed data is requested, the raw data required   for creating it will also be replaced. By default FALSE

These tags are only required if processed data is requested:

* `out_process_data`: (optional) type of processed output requested, e.g, lai
* `algorithm`: (optional) algorithm used for processing data, currently only SNAP is implemented to estimate LAI from Sentinel-2 bands
* `credfile`: (optional) absolute path to JSON file containing Earthdata username and password, only required for AppEEARS

> Additional information are taken from the registration files located at pecan/modules/data.remote/inst/registration, each source has its own registration file. This is so because there isn't a standardized way to retrieve all image collections from GEE and each image collections may require its own way of performing quality checks, etc wheras all of the products available on AppEEARS can be retrieved using its API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additional information are taken from the registration files located at pecan/modules/data.remote/inst/registration, each source has its own registration file. This is so because there isn't a standardized way to retrieve all image collections from GEE and each image collections may require its own way of performing quality checks, etc whereas all of the products available on AppEEARS can be retrieved using its API in a standardized way.
```
Thanks, could you also link `pecan/modules/data.remote/inst/registration`

When a processed data product such as SNAP-LAI is requested, the raw product (here Sentinel 2 bands) used to create it would also be stored in the DB. If the raw product required for creating the processed product already exists for the requested time period, the processed product would be created for the entire time period of the raw file. For example, if Sentinel 2 bands are present in the DB for 2017-01-01 to 2017-12-31 and SNAP-LAI is requested for 2017-03-01 to 2017-07-31, the output file would be containing LAI for 2017-01-01 to 2017-12-31.

**Input data**: The input data must be the coordinates of the area of interest (point or polygon type) and the name of the site/AOI. These information must be provided in a GeoJSON file.

**Output data**: The output data returned by the GEE are in the form of netCDF files. When using AppEEARS, output is in the form of netCDF files if the AOI type is a polygon and in the form of csv files if the AOI type is a point.

> The output files are created with the following naming convention: sitename_source_collection_scale_projection_qc_TimeStampOfFileCreation

Author: I don't have siteid here because I think that info is redundant and currently, siteid never goes beyond `call_remote_process` and reach the Python functions. But if it's required to make consistent with PEcAn guidelines I will do so.

Reviewer: -Yeah I think we would like to have siteid instead of sitename because it is less ambiguous (also some sites really have long names with spaces in them (e.g. `Ontario - Turkey Point Mature Deciduous (CA-TPD)`) whereas siteid always have an expected form, e.g. `1000000109` turns into `site_1-109` in the filename. 

-Do we really need the time stamp in the filename? 

-Also we can think about the difference between foldername and filename, for example, foldername could be `source_siteid` and the filename can be `collection_scale_projection_qc_siteid`. 
```
GEE_site_1-109
  \_  S2_10-1_site_1-109.nc
  \_  L8_10-1_site_1-109.nc
```
We can play around with these a little

Author: >  e.g. 1000000109 turns into site_1-109 in the filename.

Sorry not aware of the logic. How does this happen?

> -Do we really need the time stamp in the filename?

We need something to make the file names unique otherwise when the same data is requested again in the same outdir then the previous file will be directly overwritten before we can do anything with it. I have also tried a different approach - when the merge flag is true, I renamed the original final with some random string before starting the new download and then after merging was completed I changed it back to its original name. This worked fine but I think it's risky because if anything unexpectedly goes wrong during download or merging then the file name in the DB won't be updated and would be pointing towards an incorrect file. I used timestamp because by nature it would always be unique and human-readable but I can use the cryptography functions to generate random strings or anything else as well to make every file name unique.

Reviewer: >Sorry not aware of the logic. How does this happen?

Sorry I was being cryptical, once we know about the `siteid`, we create this string, like `paste0(siteid %/% 1e+09, "-", siteid %% 1e+09)` You can see an example [here](https://github.com/PecanProject/pecan/blob/develop/modules/data.land/R/ic_process.R#L62-L65).

>when the same data is requested again in the same outdir then the previous file will be directly overwritten before we can do anything with it. 
Hmm this doesn't sound quite right, before we do anything we query the DB to see if there has been any input file for this site, previous file should be returned from that query with date info as they are stored in the DB. Sorry, I still haven't been able to check you code in detail yet, I don't know how the merge flag works. I'll come back to this discussion once I work through your PR
